There we go. Right, so we'll kick off. I just want to do a couple of announcements.
So, the first thing to say is that, obviously, we just had the NHSR NHS PyCon conference, and it was a very resounding success.
For those of you who were there, or for those of you who attended online, if you didn't attend in person or online, or even if you did,
you should know that we are going to be publishing as many of the talks as we can, which is nearly all of them.
I think there were one or two that didn't want to be recorded for various reasons, which is fair enough,
but we'll be publishing most of them as soon as we can, and they'll live on our YouTube.
Our YouTube is already great, so go and have a look at it sometime.
There's loads of useful stuff from all of the conferences that we've done on there already.
There's some workshops upcoming as well, so we have an intro to R&R Studio, which is very popular and well attended always.
That's forthcoming, and we also have someone has offered to run a session all about GitHub Actions.
So, one of the talks at the conference was about GitHub Actions, and I believe in that talk, they said,
if you're interested in GitHub Actions, I'll be doing a workshop, and we'll be organising that workshop in November, so look out for that.
And the last thing to say about the conference is, I mean, I think it was absolutely fantastically resounding success, as I said at the time,
and I'll say again to anybody who wants to listen, but we are doing a survey to find out what was good and bad about it.
As I mentioned at the conference, we kind of re-ran last year's conference this year deliberately,
because we've got a new team in looking after it, so we didn't want to move too much stuff around.
But for next year, we've got a very kind of sincere wish to move the chairs, move the tables, move the venue,
do it totally differently, one day, three day, eight day, you know, online, you name it, any combination of things.
So, if you've got views about how it could be done better and how it was done this time, then please share them in the survey,
which will be going out very soon. Right, with all that said, thank you very much to Ryan.
Ryan is a great friend to the NHSR community, as well as Posit in general, and Ryan has come to talk to us today about package management with RStudio.
Have a seat, Ryan. All right, thanks, Chris. All right, so like Chris mentioned,
today's session is going to be all about package management in R.
And we've been doing quite a few presentations and workshops and webinars with your group,
so hopefully for a lot of folks on the line, you recognize my bald head, but if this is your first time meeting me,
and it's the first time meeting you, my name is Ryan Johnson. I'm a data science advisor here at Posit.
Part of my role is just to make sure that everyone on your team is familiar with our open source tools,
also our professional tools, and also just passing on some R and Python best practices.
And so that's kind of what we're going to be talking about mostly today.
As we go through today's session, I highly encourage you to use the Zoom chat for any questions,
and I'll be sure to keep that window open on my screen so I can see those questions coming in.
But I'm also okay if you have any questions as we go through any pressing questions.
Feel free to unmute yourself, scream into the microphone, ask any questions live.
I'm totally okay with that as well. I like to keep these very fun, casual, and a safe learning environment.
And then I will be sharing the slides with you all directly afterwards,
so no need to kind of have your notepad and pencil ready. You can just sit back, relax, and take it all in.
I also will say that there will be a few moments during today's session that if you want to follow along
and actually write some R code, it'll be very minimal R code.
But if you do have RStudio open, either your local desktop application or maybe using Posit Cloud or Posit Workbench,
wherever you access RStudio, just feel free to have that open,
and then I'll kind of direct you to that RStudio session a little bit as we go through today's session.
So what are we going to talk about today?
Well, this is going to be all about package management in R, so obviously we're going to be talking about packages.
But we're also going to be focusing on libraries and repositories.
These are going to be the big three topics for today's session.
We're going to talk about what happens when things go wrong in your package management strategy,
and also some strategies and tools to either prevent things from going wrong or to kind of fix them if they happen to.
Here's some other resources that I collected when creating this presentation.
So, again, I'll forward these slides over, some great presentations, some documentation to read through.
And then one more thing to keep in mind before we dive into today's topic,
if you were hoping I was going to stand up here and say, this is how you manage your packages in R,
that would be great if I could do that.
But unfortunately, there is no single solution for managing packages in R.
And why is that?
That's because every team is a little bit different.
So here I have listed just a few variables that can differ from one team to the next,
such as are you running R and RStudio locally on your desktop, or are you running on a server?
Are you in an air-gapped or offline environment?
Do you work in what's known as a validated environment, very popular with our pharmaceutical customers?
How secure is your IT or security team?
Who manages the environment?
Is it the users or the admin?
And can a data scientist update a package to the latest and greatest, or are they kind of locked down to a specific version?
So because all of these things differ from one team to the next, again, we're not going to have a single solution for you all.
But my goal is to provide you with a lot of topics and things to consider so that you can develop your own internal package management strategy specific for your group.
So to kick things off, I'm going to show on the screen here an error message that no matter who you are,
if you've written any bit of R code, I guarantee you at some point you've hit this error message.
So what are we doing here?
So we're trying to load the ggplot2 package, which is popular for data visualization, using the library function in R.
And we get this scary red text saying there is no package called ggplot2.
Now, if you've been using R for a couple of years now, you may know exactly what's going on here.
But put yourself in the shoes of someone who has never used R or is just starting to use R.
An error message like this generates a lot of questions.
Like, where can I find ggplot2?
Do I already have ggplot2 installed?
If not, how do I install it?
What version am I installing?
And then where do I put it after I install it?
That's a lot of questions and can certainly be overwhelming, again, for those that are new to R.
So to tackle this question and some other related questions, we're going to focus in on these three topics.
Obviously, we have packages, libraries, and repositories.
Now, I personally, when I was first learning about package management in R,
and I was trying to think of some ways to kind of help explain these three concepts,
I came up with this analogy, which I've used potentially in some other presentations for your group,
but I always think it's good to go back to.
So let's say you are in the market for a brand new car.
So this is you, and you want a new car.
So what do you do?
Well, typically, you're going to find yourself at a car dealership.
So you shop around the car dealership, and eventually you find the car of your dreams, your brand new car.
So you purchase that car.
You sit inside of it.
You turn it on.
You drive it home, and then you park it in your garage at home.
Let's say a year goes by, and for some reason, you need another new car.
So what do you do?
Same thing.
You go back to that car dealership.
You buy another new car.
You jump inside of it.
You turn it on.
You drive it home, and you park it in your garage.
So now you have two cars in your garage.
And then you can repeat this process as many times as you want for every new car that you purchase.
Now, again, a pretty silly analogy, but it does, I think, play nicely with the R ecosystem when it comes to package management.
So focusing just on the cars.
Cars are what you interact with.
You turn them on, and you drive them home.
These are your packages, because when you're writing code, you interact with packages.
Now, for your cars, you park them in a garage.
For your packages, you park them inside of what's known as a library.
So your garage, in this analogy, is your library.
And then where do you go shopping for new cars?
Well, that's your car dealership.
But where do you go shopping for new packages?
That's your repository.
So, again, silly analogy, but personally, it helped me a lot when trying to understand these various concepts.
Now, again, let's just throw some formal definitions at you, just so you have them.
In focusing on the R package, a package is a standardized collection of material that extends R.
So you're going to find code, data, documentation all inside these packages.
But the take-home message, you interact with packages.
When you're writing R code, you are typically using functions within packages.
Next, we have your R library.
This is a place, and it's going to be a directory, like a physical directory on your computer or server, where R knows to find packages it can use.
In other words, this is where you store packages.
And then you have your R repository.
And this is the primary vehicle for organizing and distributing R packages.
In other words, this is where you install packages from.
So we're going to talk about each one of those three, and we're going to start with the package.
So what is the package?
I think pretty much probably everyone on the call here has leveraged a package at some point in their R journey here.
But I think this is a really important statement here.
It's kind of like outside of today's topic.
But in R, the fundamental unit of shareable code is the package.
If you have a piece of R code that you use a lot, and you copy and paste it multiple times, maybe you want to share it with your future self in another project,
or you want to share it with a colleague, that's where you should take that code, put it inside of a function, place it inside of a package,
and then you can easily share that package.
So inside of most packages, you're going to find these four things.
Obviously, you'll find your code.
Your package may have some data that's needed for that package, or maybe just some data to play around with.
All great packages have good documentation.
And maybe you'll find some unit tests in there as well, just to make sure the package is behaving correctly.
And all of these get wrapped up into a nice, pretty package, which I purposely put in this hexagon shape,
because as many of you know, authors of packages love to create what's known as hex logos for their packages.
And here at Posit, we are no exception to this rule.
We've created tons of open source packages, and here I'm just showing a handful of them, some of our more popular ones.
So, for example, we have Shiny for creating interactive web apps using R.
There's also a Python equivalent as well.
R Markdown for static reports, GT for tables, a few other packages.
And then you can see down here, ggplot2, which we've already introduced to your team for data visualization.
And we're really just going to focus in on ggplot2 today for this workshop.
So when it comes to packages, there's really two big questions that we need to answer.
How do you install it, and how do you then load it?
So looking at the first question, how do you install a package?
And going back to the car analogy, this is on par of trying to purchase the car.
So how do you purchase the package, install the package?
Fortunately, within R, there's a very intuitive function called install.packages.
And then in open quotes and parentheses, we just give it the name of the package.
So that will install the package so it becomes yours.
But once you've purchased said package, you need to be able to turn it on,
just like you would turn on a car so you can drive it home.
So to load a package into your environment so you can use all the great functions inside of it,
we use the library function.
And same syntax, open parentheses.
The quotes here are actually optional, but sometimes it's useful just to know that you can use quotes.
So for both of these functions, you can always have the package name in quotes,
and you just give it the package name.
So knowing what you know now about packages,
let's go back to that error message we saw on the first slide
where we tried to load the ggplot2 package,
but we got an error message saying there's no package called ggplot2.
So what's going on here?
Well, it turns out we tried to load a package without first installing it.
This is basically trying to turn on a car without actually owning the car.
So we're going to jump over to our first live demo.
And again, if you have RStudio open on your computer
or if you're logged into pods at Workbench, anywhere,
feel free to follow along and you can run some of these commands with me.
But we're going to go ahead and walk through the process of installing
and loading your very first R package.
And again, we're going to focus in here on ggplot2.
Now I'm going to use Posit Workbench for my environment.
So this is an RStudio session hosted in Posit Workbench.
And what you're seeing over here in this top left quadrant,
this is an R Markdown document.
I have some code here in these code chunks interspersed with some text right here.
So let me just go ahead and set the stage here.
And we're going to come down to this first code chunk
where we're going to try to load the ggplot2 package.
Now before I run this code chunk, I want you to think of this environment
like a blank slate, like you just installed R for the first time.
You just installed RStudio.
You go to load ggplot2.
So if I run this code, we get that same error message we just saw.
There is no package called ggplot2.
But now we know what to do.
We need to install it.
We need to purchase said package.
So we'll come down here to the second.
Actually, let me go ahead and I'm just going to clear all my output here.
All right, so we're going to go ahead and install ggplot2.
So I'm going to go ahead and hit play.
And again, feel free to run this command in your own environment.
When you run this, you may see some output that's different from mine.
And that's totally okay.
As long as you're not seeing an error message,
then you can be pretty confident that this package was installed correctly.
But there's actually some other ways you can check
to make sure it was installed correctly.
And one of the easiest ways is just to see what version you installed.
So there's another function you all can take note of called package version.
You just feed it the name of the package.
We can hit play.
And you can see I have installed 3.4.4.
That's the version of ggplot2 I just installed.
So now that I've purchased the package, it is mine,
I can now turn it on so I can start using some of the functions inside of it.
And so that's going to be the role of the library function.
I'll hit play.
You might see some output.
You may not see some output.
Again, as long as you're not seeing an error message,
then you can be pretty confident that the ggplot2 package is turned on
and ready to rock.
That's kind of a side note.
If you're ever curious to know what packages are kind of loaded
in your environment and turned on,
there's the packages tab over here in the bottom right-hand corner,
and I can search for ggplot2.
And it's actually not shown here.
Okay.
I actually know what's going on.
We'll just kind of ignore that for right now.
But you can also load packages by clicking this little button right here.
But I think my lock file is a little bit different from my active version,
but we're going to talk about that a little bit later.
All right.
So coming back here to this code chunk,
now that I have ggplot2 turned on and ready to rock,
I can start using some of the functions inside of it.
So here we're going to use the ggplot function to create a plot.
We're going to use the mtcars dataset,
and we're going to plot on the x-axis, mpg, on the y-axis, wt,
and we're going to create a scatter plot or a point plot.
So I'll go ahead and hit play.
And then here's our beautiful ggplot2, again,
using the ggplot2 package that we just installed.
But we still have some lingering questions here.
Where did I install ggplot2 from?
So what was my repository or car dealership?
And then once we installed it, we had to put it somewhere on our computer.
Where did we put it?
So what's our library?
Let's go ahead and talk about repositories first.
So within R, there are plenty of repositories you can choose from,
and here I'm just listing a few of them.
Probably the most popular R repository currently out there
is something known as CRAN.
CRAN stands for the Comprehensive R Archive Network.
And how it works is pretty cool.
So it's actually not like a single server.
It's actually a series of servers scattered throughout the world.
And every single one of those servers is completely identical,
so they all store the exact same information.
And because of that, they're often referred to as mirrors.
So you may hear someone say a CRAN mirror.
As of March of this year, so a couple months ago now,
there was over 19,000 R packages on CRAN.
So, again, CRAN, by far, probably the largest repository of R packages.
But there's other repositories you can choose from.
So there may be some folks on the line here that have leveraged packages
within Bioconductor before.
So if you're doing any type of bioinformatics,
Bioconductor could be a great repository of packages.
And as of, again, March of 2023,
there's a little over 2,000 packages on Bioconductor.
But anywhere you can go shopping for a package
can serve as a source of package, a repository.
So that can be RForge, it can be GitHub or GitLab,
anywhere you can install a package from.
So that begs the question, well, what repository am I using?
So in your RStudio environment, R environment,
when you install ggplot2, where did you go shopping?
You can check that by running this function.
So the options function, open and close parentheses,
and in quotes, repos, which is just shorthand for repositories.
And that will print to the console whatever repository you use
to install that package from.
So here in this screenshot, you can see I'm actually pointing
to an instance of Posit's own CRAN mirror.
Yours may be this, it may be something different.
That's totally fine, but this is how you can check.
It's also worth noting that you can see what repository
you're using and also change your repository
using the RStudio IDE.
If you go to tools, global options, and packages.
And I'll go ahead and show you this here in a second.
So let's go back to RStudio and just ask what question,
what repositories you're using for your environment.
So again, feel free to run some of these commands
in your own environment.
But all I'm going to do right here is I'm going to run
options repos.
And that's just going to print to the console right underneath
this code chunk, my repository.
It's worth noting that for the most part repositories
are just going to be URLs, websites.
So here you can see this website right here.
Let me quickly talk about this, but we're going to focus in
on it a little bit later.
So in the first part of this URL, you see colorado.rstudio.com.
This is our demo environment here at Posit.
We call it Colorado.
I have no idea why.
We just do.
And then we can follow the path here.
We see RSPM.
RS is RStudio Package Manager or Posit Package Manager.
We see all Linux jammies.
So we're pulling in Linux binaries.
We'll talk about that a little bit later.
And then I'm pulling in the latest and greatest packages.
So it's just worth noting that in my environment right here
in Posit Workbench, I'm pointing to an instance
of Posit Package Manager.
But if you run this function in your environment,
it's likely going to be a bit different.
But this is how you can check to see
which repositories you're using.
Okay, so we talked about packages.
We talked about repositories.
Now we're going to focus in on libraries.
And of the three, libraries tends to be the most complex.
So we're going to spend a lot of time talking about libraries.
But before we really dig into it,
let's just ask the question,
where did we put ggplot2 once we installed it?
What is our library?
So there's another function within R
that's kind of built into R called .libpats.
And that will print to your console
what libraries are currently active in your environment.
So go ahead and run this in your own environment.
And it's worth noting that what you're seeing on the screen,
this is my library, at least in the screenshot.
Yours 100% is going to be different from mine.
Because again, this is going to be a directory,
like a folder on your computer,
which is unique to your environment.
So yours is going to be different.
Let's go ahead and just check it.
What libraries are you using?
I'm going to come back here,
and we're just going to run .libpats.
No arguments, just the function.
We'll hit play.
And you can see here, I actually have two libraries.
So if you are using something known as Rn,
you may see multiple libraries.
But it's going to use this top one by default.
And so when I go to install a package,
this is the path on my system where it's going to be placed.
And I can follow this path if I want to.
So using my file directory here in the bottom right-hand corner,
you can see I'm currently within this package management R,
which is right here.
So we can just follow the path.
So I can go to Rn, library 4.2, that guy.
And here's all the packages that I currently installed on my system.
And you can see they're actually just directories within this folder.
All right, some notes about R libraries.
Some of these points we've already touched upon.
The first one, R packages, again, are installed into libraries.
These are directories on your system,
and they contain a subdirectory for each package installed there,
as you just saw.
The second point here is something I have not mentioned yet,
but I think is really important.
Libraries, they're going to be associated with a specific version of R.
So take a look at the path you see here on the bottom of your screen,
and you'll notice at the very end you see 4.1.
This library is associated with R version 4.1.
If I was to install R version 4.2, so another major version of R,
that's going to create a new library for those packages.
And then this last point here, library environments are different
if you're using RStudio on your local machine,
so on your laptop, for example,
versus a Posit Workbench or a server-based environment.
So let's actually talk about that last point here.
And first, let's go through a scenario where you're running R in RStudio
on your local machine, let's say your laptop,
probably many folks here on the call right now.
So in this environment, it's pretty simple
because you are the owner of this laptop,
so there's one user, and there's going to be one R library.
And this is known as your own personal system library.
So you can go to your Packages tab, and if you go to the –
you'll see at the very top, you should see System Library.
Now, when it comes to a server environment,
it gets a little bit hairier because now you have a single environment,
the server, but you have multiple people logging into the server at once.
And so every single user that does log in,
they will have their own user library.
So every single one of these users will have a library
that's called a user library.
But there's one additional library which can be really powerful
and helpful for larger data science teams,
and that's known as a shared system library.
So if we take a look at this Packages tab in this environment,
I'm running here within Posit Workbench,
you can see all these packages listed here,
and I actually have two libraries.
This first one is my user library.
So, again, these are packages that I've logged into Posit Workbench
and I've installed.
So these are my packages, my user packages in my user library.
But when I logged in for the very first time without doing anything else,
there were actually some packages already installed for me,
and that's known as this shared system library.
So this is something our system administrators set up.
They installed packages onto the server
and made them available to everyone.
So, again, this is good if you have larger data science teams,
and that way you don't have to install the same package
for every single user.
You can just share a package across users.
All right, but there's one more library I want to talk about
that wasn't confusing enough.
And to introduce this library, let's go through a scenario.
Let's say you have – we'll start right here at Project 1.
You come in Monday morning.
Your boss sends you an email with a data set,
and they want you to analyze it.
And so you decide you're going to create some plots,
so you're going to use ggplot2, and we'll just say version 1.
You create the document or whatever.
They're really beautiful visualizations,
and then you send it off for review somewhere.
Some time goes by, and you get a second project thrown at you,
and you decide to do the same thing, create some visualizations.
But there's now a new version of ggplot2.
We'll just call it version 2.
So you install the new version.
Things are going great.
But let's say while you're working on Project 2,
Project 1 actually kind of comes back to you.
So you get an email saying,
oh, we need you to go back to Project 1
and redo some of the plots.
And now you're in a bit of a pickle because Project 1,
as you remember, it used version 1 of ggplot2.
So what do you do?
Well, you could try to kind of revert ggplot2 back to version 1,
which is probably easier said than done.
Or you can try to bring ggplot2 up to speed
with the latest and greatest version,
which might work or might break some things.
So it's not great for reproducibility.
So what would be much nicer is if we could just isolate these two projects
so that Project 1 always used version 1
and Project 2 always used version 2.
And you can do that with the help of something known as RStudio Projects
in combination with a tool known as renv.
So renv is another open source R package that we've developed here at Posit.
And it gives you access to a third library
or fourth library at this point called a project library.
So a little bit about RStudio Projects and renv.
What are they?
So when you use an RStudio Project,
that gives this project, whatever you're working on,
its own working directory.
And inside of that working directory will be your code, data, results,
tables, figures, everything associated with that project,
including the packages needed for this project and only this project.
And that's through the power of renv.
So it makes every single project its own isolated environment,
which makes it projects much easier to share,
makes your projects much more reproducible.
And it also gives you access to something known as an renv log file,
which we'll briefly talk about here in a second.
But if you've never used projects before,
let me just quickly introduce you to how to create them.
There's actually a few different ways you can do it in the RStudio IDE.
I'm just going to show you one method.
So if you have an RStudio session open, you can go to File, New Project.
And that'll bring open this menu here where you can give your project a name.
And this is going to create a new directory on your computer.
So give that directory a name,
where you want to place that directory on your system.
And then importantly, you want to check this box to use renv with this project,
because then that's going to give you access to that project library.
You hit Create Project.
It's going to open you up in a new RStudio session.
You should see the name of the project here in the top right corner.
And then if you click on the Packages tab,
you should now have access to a project library.
So again, this library is specific to this project and only this project.
And then within the file directory, you'll see a few additional files.
So you'll always see this rproj file within the home directory of your project.
And then we have this rm directory and we have this rm lock file.
So I believe we talked about lock files with your team before.
But just quickly introduce you to lock files.
This is the first time you're seeing them.
This is an example lock file.
And they're very ugly to look at because they're written in JSON format,
but they're actually pretty easy to read.
You can start right up here at the very top
and see what R version was used for this project, so 4.1.
What active repositories were used for the project.
So where did this user go and get their packages?
You can see it's CRAN.
And then everything else is just information about the packages in this project.
So here we have two listed, Markdown and MIME.
You can see their associated versions.
So that's something that Rnv is really good at,
is keeping track of what versions of packages you use,
where you obtain them.
You can also see this hash here.
We're not going to talk too much about that today,
but that's important for global package caching.
Okay, so to summarize what we talked about with libraries,
because, again, libraries is a bit confusing.
Hopefully this flow diagram helps out a little bit.
But if you just ask the question, if you install a package, where does it go?
So if you start up here at the very top, we install ggplot2.
The first question you should ask is, are you using an RStudio project?
If yes, are you using Rnv?
And if yes, then the answer is that package is going to go into your project library.
But if you're not using Rnv, or if you're not within an RStudio project,
the next question becomes, where are you running R?
Are you running it on your local desktop or laptop?
In that case, it'll go into your personal system library.
Or are you running on a server, like Posit Workbench,
in which case it'll go into your personal user library.
So those are kind of like the three main libraries to keep track of
as you're working through R.
Okay, so now that we've covered packages, libraries, and repositories,
let's talk about the not-so-fun stuff.
And that is package dependency conflicts,
or basically what happens when things go wrong.
So let me run through a scenario with you.
I'm going to pick a random date. This is completely arbitrary.
We'll say January 1, 2020.
You open up R and RStudio, and you install a package.
We'll focus on the tbl package, which some of you may be familiar with.
So we go and install .packages, the tbl package.
It is very common in R, and also in Python,
for packages to depend on other packages.
So by installing the tbl package, it actually, by default,
will install three dependencies, the rlang, cli, and cran packages.
Now, again, on this date, we installed tbl and all those dependencies,
so they're all being installed at the exact same time.
And there's actually a cool thing that cran does.
So again, that big repository of R packages.
Cran always tests to ensure that the latest packages
always work together.
So if you install these packages on the exact same date,
all the packages and the versions and dependencies,
they should all work nicely together. You shouldn't get any conflicts.
But let's fast forward a month.
I'm just taking some arbitrary time.
And you go back into that same R environment where you install tbl.
And you now install another package,
and we'll focus on the packagedown package.
So you install packagedown. It turns out packagedown
actually has the same three dependencies,
rlang, cli, and cran.
But because this is being installed a month later,
it turns out there's actually some new versions of these various dependencies,
which is why they're kind of shaded in this darker gray color.
So by installing packagedown on February 1st,
it'll automatically update the rlang, cli, and cran packages.
But what it will not do is update the tbl package itself.
And now you're in a bit of a broken state
because you have an old version of tbl
that's trying to use new versions of its dependencies,
and you may run into some issues where functions aren't behaving as expected.
So how do we get around this?
Well, I mentioned before that cran tests to ensure
that the latest packages always work together.
So because of that, it's very common for data science teams
to do something what's known as freezing a repository
to a set date.
So let me explain how this works.
So again, we have two dates right here, and we have January 1st, 2020.
And let's say that you as the user or your administrator
decides to freeze your repository
to this date, February 1st.
You install tbl, things go great, and then you fast forward
to February 1st. But even though it's February 1st,
your repository is still frozen to January 1st.
So you go to install packagedown in February,
but it still installs it as if it's January 1st.
So no matter when you installed any subsequent packages,
they're all being installed as if it's the same time.
So all these packages, again, should work together
because that's the added service that CRAN provides.
Okay, now that we've talked about a bunch of different things,
you might have some questions kind of circulating in your head
as you start to devise your own package management strategy.
You know, things like who is going to be responsible
for reproducing the environment?
Is that going to be up to the data scientists, the users,
or is it going to be up to my system administrators?
Also, how open is the environment? Can a user
install a new package, or are they going to be locked down to a specific
version? Should we be using these shared
system libraries or just specific user libraries?
And really, you have to weigh the pros and cons
specific to your team. It's nice to talk to
other teams as well and to kind of see what they're doing, but ultimately
it's just to find a solution that kind of meets your team's
needs. Now having said
that, we have worked with a bunch of teams here at Posit
where we've seen package management strategies succeed
and we've seen some strategies not so succeed.
And so what you're seeing on this plot right here,
we're showing you a few different strategies that we're going to
touch upon. On the y-axis, we're looking at package
access. So that's asking, can a user
install whatever package they want? So is it open,
or is it fairly locked down? So they're kind of constrained to specific
packages or specific versions. And then
on the x-axis, we're looking at who is responsible for
reproducing the environment. Is that going to be up to your system
administrators, or is it going to be up to the data scientists?
We find teams have the most success
somewhere along this diagonal. And we're
actually going to talk about these three strategies. We're going to start with snapshot,
then we'll talk about shared baseline, and then finally a validated
strategy. And then we'll just briefly touch
upon some of these other strategies where we see things go a little
bit haywire. So let's go ahead and start with
snapshot in the top right corner here. For
every single one of these strategies, we'll kind of talk about what
they are and then some pros and cons of each.
So in a snapshot strategy, users are able
to freely access and install whatever package
they want, but you must be using RStudio
projects and that renv package we talked about before.
You have to be using that renv lock file.
So in this scenario, users are going to have the
full responsibility to record the dependencies
needed for a project. So in a typical workflow,
you would create a project, you then write some code,
install some packages, write more code, install other packages,
and you use that renv package to
snapshot your environment, to record what packages you're using.
That's going to update that lock file, which you can then use
to restore your environment if needed.
Now the pros for a snapshot is that it definitely gives
users access to pretty much any package and any version
they want to use. And the
second point right here, I put it as a pro, but depending on your
team, you may consider it a con. It's really going to
require little to no IT or sysadmin involvement.
It's really going to be on the shoulders of the users.
And that kind of leads me to my major
con here, is that if you're brand new to R and now
you're being tasked with keeping track of every package you're
using and the versions, that can be a slight
barrier for those that are brand new to R.
Now it's worth noting that if you
are running RStudio locally on your personal
laptop, we'd certainly recommend that you use
this strategy for all of your projects.
Okay, the
second strategy we're going to talk about is something known as a shared
baseline. And it's just like a side note, this is actually what we use
internally here at Posit. In this strategy,
all or most of CRAN, so all 19,
20,000 packages of CRAN are made available
to every single user via that shared
system library. But users are
still able to freely access and install any
package they want, any version they want,
and they can install it into their own project and or user
library. So the reason why
we really like this strategy, it's good for both those
that are new to R and more advanced users.
For those that are new, all these packages are already there available
to them. But for the advanced R users, they can still
reach out and grab a development version of a package
or the latest and greatest. It can also
reduce duplicate package installs across users.
So I mentioned before that when you use that shared
baseline strategy, that prevents every single user
installing the same package into their own user library, and especially
if you have a large data science team, that can be a bit of a waste of space.
I do put this asterisk here, though, because for the most
part, packages in R are not very big. They're just a series
of text files. So it's not really going to take up
that much space on your system, but it can be a way to save
up, I know, a couple megabytes.
Now the cons here, if you're not
running Posit within a server environment, then this
strategy is not going to be available to you. So it's not going to be available
for desktop R users. And then that shared
library, it may not include the latest and greatest,
and it's ultimately going to be controlled by your system administrators.
The last
strategy we'll talk about is something known as a
validated strategy. And this is a very popular strategy,
especially amongst our pharmaceutical, our
life sciences groups, folks that are going to be
submitting things to, say, some regulatory
agency like the FDA here in the States.
So in a validated strategy, it's going to restrict
access to a particular set of packages that
your team deems as validated.
Now I put validated in quotes because
a question that I routinely get is, hey, Ryan, is
this package considered validated or not? I would love
to be able to answer that question. But unfortunately, every single team
is unique. And what one team may consider
something validated, another team may not. And so
every single team kind of has to create their own series
of checks to determine if a package
is considered validated and use their own judgment.
Now, also for users of a validated
environment, if they want to use a package that's not currently
considered validated, then they're kind of out of luck and
they have to go through an approval process to hopefully get that
package validated in their environment.
Now, the pros here with a validated strategy and
why it's so important for our pharmaceutical groups
is that you can confidently recreate the same
environment outcome. So if you go to submit something
to the FDA, you want to make sure that the results,
the same thing, you'll get results today, you'll get the same results
a week from now, a year from now, 10 years from now. So you
really have to make sure that these analyses do not change at
all. And you can trust what's in your environment.
You've done your homework. You know every single thing about every
single package in your environment. So you can be very confident, be very
safe in this validated environment. Now, there's
certainly going to be quite a few cons. It will require
a lot more IT and sysadmin involvement.
Also, maintaining a validated environment is not a trivial
task. And I've worked with groups that have dedicated teams
just to maintaining a validated environment.
And then finally, users can be constrained
to select packages. So if there's
if they see online or on social media, there's a new package
with a function that works perfect for them, they may not
have access to it because it's not considered validated.
All right, another flow diagram. We're not going to
talk about this one. But again, when I share the slides,
you can read through this. And what I'm trying to do is
guide users into what package management
strategy they should at least consider. So starting
here with the user at the very top. So you can see
in green here, the three strategies we just talked about, snapshot,
shared baseline and validated. But here
in red, we also have some strategies which tend not to be
so good. And their names kind of
kind of tip the hat to what they are.
So the first strategy is known as Wild West.
And so in a Wild West, there's basically
no regard for reproducibility. They can install whatever
package they want into whatever library they want, whatever version.
This is where you run into those package dependency
conflicts most frequently. We also
have something known as a ticket system. It's very similar
to a validated environment because a user will
require to have to submit a ticket
in order to get access to a package. But the issue
is that the folks that are approving said tickets don't
have much regard for reproducibility. And they can just either deny
or just add packages willy nilly, which could also
result in dependency conflicts.
And then we have a blocked environment, which is just a
lose-lose situation for both sides of the coin.
In a blocked environment, usually the Internet is cut off.
There's no way to reach out externally for packages.
And so in order to use functions outside
of base R, users are going to have to figure out
some backdoor ways to get packages in there and it causes security
concerns. So this is never a good solution really
for any team.
So we're getting pretty close to the end here.
And we've talked about a lot of different things from the
perspective of your data scientists, your developers,
but also your system administrators and your IT teams.
Things like what repositories are we going
to use? Are we going to use CRAN, Bioconductor? Are we going to pull
packages from source? Are we going to use Python
packages, which we haven't talked about today?
Where are we going to be running code? Are we going to have users leverage
their own laptops or are we going to use Posit Workbench, a server-based
environment? And then for our repositories, are we going to
make them the latest and greatest packages available? Are we going
to freeze a repository to a specific date?
So that's a lot of different questions I have to answer.
So what we've done here at Posit is create a tool to hopefully
help simplify this a bit. And that's called
Posit Package Manager.
So if you've never heard of Posit Package Manager before,
here's just a few bullet points that get you up to speed.
Posit Package Manager, just like all of our
professional tools, these are internal solutions.
So they can be installed on a Linux server, either on-prem,
like literally physically next to you, or they can be
installed in whatever cloud environment you want.
But importantly, they can stay within your network, within your
firewall. So that can be really important for teams that don't
have any outside access to the Internet.
And you can do some cool things with it, like you can have your own
NHS CRAN mirror if you wanted to. So all 19,000
packages on CRAN, you can have your own personal CRAN mirror.
Also, for anyone on the line that develops
their own packages, either in R or Python, you can
now give those packages a home. So most times
folks will have them hosted on GitHub or something like that, which
if they're public, then that's great, but
maybe if they're not public, or maybe versioning can be an
issue, you can now host them on Package Manager
and easily install them and share them across your team.
And then you can create customized repositories.
So we only talked about CRAN, but you can create your own subsets
of repositories and freeze them to specific
dates, and I'll show you that here in a second.
But this fourth bullet point is really the main take-home message,
is that Package Manager is designed to be your
one-stop shop. If we go back to our
car dealership analogy, so you remember
a repository is a car dealership. Let's say there's
a new dealership that shows up on the street and just buys
all of the other local dealerships, and now it becomes this one
mega dealership. That's essentially what Package
Manager is, is that you don't have to worry about reaching out to
all these various sources, you can just bring them all together into
a centralized location. So you can serve CRAN packages,
Bioconductor, PyPI, all within
one location. The last two
points are kind of more aimed to your system administrators.
You can easily manage package and system dependencies using
Package Manager, and I'll show you that here in a second, and you can
also serve Linux binaries.
So if you are using a server-based environment for all
your development on a Linux server, and you go to install a package,
you can know that sometimes that takes a while
to build a package from source code, but
something that Posit Package Manager does is like an added service,
is that it serves Linux binaries or pre-built
binaries. So we'll talk about those here in a second.
So let me actually, before we jump into
a demo of Package Manager, let me actually show you what Package
Manager looks like. So I'm going to come in here
to my demo environment, and we'll select Package Manager.
Now again, for the most part,
Package Manager is going to be a tool that is
maintained and configured by your system administrators,
but there is a more or less a user
interface that your data scientists or anyone else on your
team can access and see what repositories
and what packages are available to them.
And we'll first start over here on the left-hand side of your screen,
this little sidebar, and you can see we have
three different types of repositories. We have R repositories,
we have Bioconductor repositories,
and we have Python repositories.
And within the R ecosystem, you can see we've developed, again,
this is our demo environment, so we've created about
seven or so different repositories.
Your team, if you want to develop your own repositories, you absolutely
can. But to run through a few of these, you can see
here I've selected a CRAN mirror, so all 19,000
or so packages on CRAN are now on a custom
repository that we are hosting on our instance of Package
Manager. You also can have
internal repositories, so any R package you've
created internally, you can now host them in an internal repository.
Here's a validated repository subset,
so again, you can choose and create whatever repositories you want
based on your team's needs. Here again, you can
access any Bioconductor package, and then for any
Python developers, any package that's currently on
PyPI, which is probably the largest repository
of Python packages, there's about half a million Python packages,
you can have your own PyPI mirror and also
host any internally developed Python packages.
But for right now, let's just go ahead and select CRAN.
So you can see CRAN is here in the top left corner, and we'll see
some tabs along the top here. So starting on packages,
this is just a way for you to explore all the various
packages in CRAN. So if I wanted to search for ggplot2,
I can do that, and I can see how do I
install it, what's the most recent version, 3.4.4.
You can also just get some more
information about this package. One of the fun things
I like to look at for packages like ggplot2,
which are very popular, is things like reverse
imports. These are all packages on CRAN
that depend on ggplot2.
So by installing, say, the abacus package, it will
automatically install the ggplot2 package as well.
And there's about 3,000 packages on CRAN that
depend on ggplot2. And then scrolling
down some more here, you can also see archived versions.
So if you needed to go back to a previous version of a package,
you can actually click on it, and it'll provide you with the code
how to install a previous version into your active environment.
So moving across the tabs here, we have activity.
So as I mentioned before, package
manager will actually reach out to various sources
and bring all those packages together into a centralized
location, but it does need to make periodic checks
to those various sources, or what we call syncs.
So you can set up package manager to have as many syncs as you
want at whatever cadence you want. And every time it performs
a sync, you can come in here to the activity tab and see what
packages on CRAN were added, which ones are archived,
and if any packages were deleted. So it's just kind of more
for your information. But the real magic
of package manager occurs right here with the setup tab.
And the first thing I'll mention here is
the repository URL. So as we talked about before
when we ran options repos, when you
point to a repository, that's a URL. That's all it is.
So if you want to use this instance of
package manager and you want to pull in packages from this instance,
all you need to do is grab the URL right down here at the
bottom. And we actually already saw this URL.
So again, colorado.posit.co, that's our demo environment.
RStudio Reposit Package Manager.
Here I'm on the CRAN repository.
And then you're going to see something called Linux Focal.
I mentioned in this last slide that
you can actually serve Linux binaries. And so here
I'm supplying Linux binaries for Ubuntu 20,
which is also known as Focal. But you can choose whatever
distribution is running Posit Workbench or Posit
Connect so that you can serve that flavor of Linux
as well. And then the last
thing you'll see here is latest. And so that means if I
use this entire URL, it's going to pull in Linux
binaries and it's always going to pull in the latest and greatest
versions of whatever packages I ask.
But again, depending on your team's package management
strategy, maybe this is not what you want to do. And
instead you want to freeze a repository to a specific
date. So to do that, that's where this calendar comes into
play. You can just select a date. So I can go back to
October 3rd of this month. And now you can see the URL
has changed. And you can see at the very end, instead of saying latest,
it now says October 3rd of 2023.
If I use this URL, no matter what date I am into the
future, it will always install packages as
if it's October 3rd of 2023.
All right, scrolling down just a little bit more,
install system prerequisites. This is another added
service of Package Manager in that it will look into
every single one of these repositories on the left-hand side
and extract any system dependencies
needed for your flavor of Linux or if you're running on
Mac or Windows and provides your system administrators with
a customized script. So what you're seeing right here
is a pretty massive script because it
will install every single system dependency needed
for Ubuntu 20 for every single package on
CRAN. That way you can always ensure that when your data
scientists go to install a package on Posit Workbench
or Connect, that the packages just work and those system
dependencies are there for them. And then finally,
you can see instructions for how to leverage Package Manager
if you're using Posit Workbench or if you're just running the RStudio
IDE on your local desktop computer.
You can also set it programmatically by altering, say,
like your R profile file.
Okay, so now we know a little bit more about Package Manager.
Let's come back here to RStudio and I'm actually
going to switch over to a different session of RStudio.
This is one of the benefits of Posit Workbench is I can have
multiple sessions going. I'm going to go to this Posit Package
Manager demo project.
All right, so let me go ahead and clear my output.
And we're just going to review a few things
and then talk about how we can leverage Package Manager here.
So in this first code chunk, we're just going to install
ggplot2 and then I'm going to check to see what version
I installed. So let's go ahead and run this command.
All right, and we see some output. Again, if you run this command
in your environment, your output might be different. That's okay.
And then you can see that I've installed version 3.4.4
which, as you may recall, is the latest version of
ggplot2. We scroll down a little bit
further and we just ask the question, where did I install
it from? So what are my repositories? So we can run options
repos. I'll hit play.
And here you can actually see I'm pointing to a bunch of
different repositories. But if we're done here at the bottom,
here's that instance of RStudio Package Manager that we were talking about
earlier.
Now, this is where I want to show how fast are these
pre-built Linux binaries. I'm actually going to run
this code chunk right here and then I'll show you, I'll kind of
explain the code. So here we're going to install
ggplot2 just like we did before. But I'm now
manually changing the repository. And if you
check the repository, you're not seeing Linux
focal or anything like that in the path. That's because
I'm now going to install this package from source and then
check to see how long it takes. So you can see here
down at the bottom, it's installing from source and it's taking a little
bit of time. So we'll give it a few more seconds here.
Alright, almost
done.
And there
we go. You can see it took about 30, almost 37
seconds to install ggplot2 from
source. Now again, this concept of binaries
and source isn't quite clicking just yet. Another
way to think about it, and we'll go back to our car analogy.
If you install a package from source
code, think of that as purchasing a new car, but
instead of it coming as a car, it comes as a series
of packages, like the tires are in one package, the engine's in another
package, and you have to assemble that car before you
can drive it. That's what it's like to install packages from
source. You get all the separate components and then you have to build
it for your specific system that you're working within.
A binary means that that package comes pre-built
specific to your environment, so that car is already built
and ready to be interacted with immediately.
So it took about 37 seconds to install
this package from source, and in the second code chunk
we're going to do the exact same thing, but now you can see
Linux jamming in the path, so we're going to install a pre-built
Linux binary. So I'll hit play here.
And it's done. And you can see it took about 7.5
seconds, so it's a pretty dramatic
speedup to install packages as Linux binaries.
You may be saying, like, oh, well, right, no, 37 seconds
isn't that long. I can wait 37 seconds. But let's say,
for example, you are building, let's say, like custom
Docker images for your projects, and
you have to install, let's say, like 100 or 1,000
packages at once. That could take hours to run.
And so by using Linux binaries, you can, you know,
slice that number in half into just a couple minutes
to install a bunch of packages into your custom Docker images.
Then the last thing I'll mention here, we'll just
show you how to go back in time or freeze repositories
to specific dates. I'm going to go ahead and run this
command here, and I'll talk about what's going on.
So we're going to install ggplot2 one more time,
but here the URL you can see at the very end
is actually a snapshot, or sorry, it's frozen
to a specific date, so November 2nd of
2020. So we're going to install ggplot2 as
if it's that date, and then we're going to check to see what
version we installed. So let's just give this a few seconds to run.
And it should be almost done.
And there we go. You can see at the very bottom here,
on November 2nd of 2020,
ggplot2 was at version 3.3.2.
So again, that's how you can use that snapshot feature
to go back in time to install previous
versions of a package.
All right, and just to wrap things up, some final
thoughts. It may, hopefully
it's probably apparent at this point that package environment
management, it is not easy.
And every team is going to be different, so
you really have to kind of talk internally to
devise your own personal package management strategy that meets
your team's needs. But I will say one thing that
for every team that has implemented a successful
package management strategy, one thing that's conserved is
that they have good communication between whoever's
managing the environment on the back end, so like the servers,
anything like that, so your IT or system administrators
and the end users. So keeping a good line of communication
between those groups is paramount. So if you haven't
established that relationship just yet, it might be time to
walk down the hall, the virtual hall and say hello
as you're starting to develop your own package management strategy.
All right, I know we left
about 30 or so minutes a little bit early, so
happy to use any of the remainder of time to answer any
questions the best I can. And if I can't
answer those questions, I'll be sure to track those down and
follow up in an email.
Great, thanks, Ryan. Yeah, I think one question's
come through already, so please do put any more questions in
the chat if you want to, or you can just shout up if you like.
Just before we go into questions, well, no, I was
going to thank you because the webinar was so interesting, but I'll do that
at the end, actually. Let's have the questions first. Right, yeah, so the first
question that's come in is how do you set up the project library with the
renv package?
Yeah, it's a good question, and
we do, and I can't actually recall if we've actually had
that webinar with your team already, but I do have a separate webinar
that's much more focused on renv.
We briefly talked about it. Let me actually share my screen
one more time, and I can actually just show you one way
to do that. So we're going to zip back in
time here to right here.
So this slide is just going to show you, these two
slides will show you how you can initialize
an RStudio project with renv right out of
the gate. So you have like a brand new project that you're creating.
So all you need to do is, within an RStudio session,
go to File, New Project, and you should see this window.
And to initialize this project with
renv and to get access to that project
library, make sure you check this box right here.
Use renv with this project. And then once you hit
Create Project, it'll plop you into a new RStudio
session inside of that project with that project
library ready to go. Now the other question
that I sometimes get is, well, what if I already have an RStudio
project, but it's not using renv currently?
That's kind of what my other webinar focuses on, but just to
briefly talk about it, you know, for example,
if I was in this RStudio session and I'm not
using renv, you can initialize projects,
so pre-existing projects, with renv by running
renv init. All you have to do is run
that function, and it'll automatically, you know, create
that renv lock file, the renv directory,
and it'll initialize the project with a project
library. So those are kind of the two main methods I would suggest
for getting access to that project library in renv.
Yeah, I've got a question. I think, I mean, you've touched on it here
and there, but I just wonder if I could ask
a more specific question. So I think what
people will often be in the situation, I think, where they are
doing lots of good work with kind of versions
with package management, so they've written this beautiful package
and they've spent ages, but then they want to share it with people,
and I'm just wondering, those people might, because I find
renv very faffy, to be honest. I've been sent stuff, and renv will,
you know, it can be a bit intimidating
or confusing or difficult to work with. So just wondering, what's your advice?
If you've done it all right, how do you help
other people to kind of pick up on your good work?
With, like, leveraging RNs?
Well, yeah. Or is there a way that's easier?
Because I put, I mean, you know, I do love RN. I get the point.
It can be heavyweight in my,
so I wondered if you'd say, oh, well, actually, sometimes, you know,
there's a way that's a bit less, you know,
intimidating for people. Yeah. I mean, so
RN, like Chris mentioned, it's a really
amazing package, and all it's trying to do is, it's
absolutely best to help you out in terms of managing your packages
because, as we've discussed today, things can
certainly go wrong, and so RN is trying its best to be a helper.
It's never trying to be, like, an extra burden
for folks to manage, but it can certainly feel like that because
there's a lot that goes into RN, and there's,
with package management, there's a lot of things that can go wrong.
So when things go wrong, the question then becomes, like, well, how can I then use
RN to kind of help make things go right?
So there's lots of different functions
within RN to kind of speak to a lot of those points,
but if you're brand new to RN
and you're just like, you know, how do I get started? How do I get
comfortable using RN? There's really just, like,
two or three functions that you need to remember, and we just
talked about one of them. So if you
want to initialize a project with RN,
and I noticed there was a question here about, like, the difference between
RN to activate and RN to init.
Init's going to initialize a project that's never used RN before,
so it's not seen RN, and it's going to set the stage
with a project that will now subsequently be using RN.
Activate will take a project that has
RN, kind of all the architecture for it, but it hasn't been
essentially turned on, and so activate will kind of kick it on.
Init's going to create that project for you with a project
library. At that point, the stage is set.
You can just go about your data science business. You really don't have
to think too much about RN, but as you wrap
up for the day, and, you know, as you've been
writing some code, you've probably installed some packages, maybe you've
updated some packages. At that point, you want to just, you know,
take a snapshot and record all
those new packages and new versions that are in your project,
so the other function you need to remember is
snapshot, and that will automatically update the lock
file for you. Those two functions,
the snapshot one is probably one of the more important ones because that's going to keep
track of that lock file, like you see right down here,
which I can click on, and you can see for this project, it's a little bit more
extensive, and it's keeping track of all these packages
and their associated versions. You, for the most part,
never have to manually edit this. RN will take care of it
for you, and that alone,
like this RN block file, this is an important
file because now, if I wanted to share this project with
Chris, for example, I can now have a record
of what packages I used for this project and what versions,
and that's, again, that's a perfect, like, step
one. That's it. Now, for example,
Chris does want to take this project, and he wants to
restore his environment to match mine, then
the other function you need to remember is RN
restore, and that will read in a lock file, and it
will restore a project library to match that lock
file. Those are the three functions that, if you're just
getting started with RN, init, snapshot, restore. Those are the only three
you need to remember. That will get you through probably, like, 90%
of your RN workflows, but there's a few other ones that,
you know, depending on your use case, and especially if you're collaborating with
others or you're developing packages within RN,
there might be a few other functions to check out, in which
case, I would just recommend the RN GitHub pages
because the documentation is actually pretty awesome, and
we just, Kevin, who's the main developer of RN,
just kind of redid them, like, about half a year ago.
I wonder whether people maybe haven't called
RN snapshot and have sent me code, maybe, because
people have sent me stuff that appears to be broken, and I didn't
know it was me. Anyway, right, what
else have we got in the chat? Oh, yeah, so there's a question,
would you start basically all projects by including
the repository URL for the install most recent
packages and then change that URL
down the line? Yeah, it's a good question,
and again, these are the things that are going to depend on
your team and what kind of strategy
you want to set forth moving forward. I would say the most
conservative thing you can probably do is that when you have a brand
new project you've just created and you
can essentially set the repository URL
and freeze it to that specific date,
that's going to be very conservative because essentially you're now saying, okay, I'm going to start
this project on this date, and in the future,
like a month from now, if there's a new package out there, I'm not going to use it.
I'm only going to use the packages associated with that specific
date. So that's one way to do it, and there's
advantages to that because that way you know that things are never going to
break. You're basically stuck in one state.
But if a new package version comes out and you're
like, man, I really want to use that version or that new function inside
that package, then you've got to think about ways
on how to kind of incrementally upgrade packages
and make sure that it doesn't break any dependencies.
And that's something that RM does try its best to help you out with.
So it'll kind of let you know if dependencies are out of state
or out of sync, and we'll do its best to kind of inform
you and provide you with next steps to get everything up to a
happy working state. But again, it's ultimately up to
you and your team and how you want to design projects.
I do see one question in the chat as well
where someone says they don't have access to that
new project, and it's interesting because you're actually
within Posit Cloud, which is totally fine,
but just kind of behind the scenes, Posit Cloud,
the way it works, every single RStudio session
you open, by default, is a project.
So that's why within Posit Cloud, there's actually
not a feature to create a project because you're
already in a project. So
essentially if you had that button in Posit Cloud, you'd be creating a project
within a project. That's just the way Posit
Cloud works by default. So every single RStudio session
you open is a project. But if you're running RStudio
on your local computer, like the local desktop application or
Posit Workbench, then you should see the new project
option. And not a dumb question
because I actually give a webinar on creating
and sharing R packages, and for those that have developed
packages before, you typically create a project
for that, and I do the session within Posit Cloud, and that
part's like, if you're like, oh, trust me, people, we're not
creating a project because, well, everything I just said.
So not a silly question at all.
Great.
OK, I can't see any more questions in the chat, I don't think.
Anybody else want to either shout up or type
anything?
Yeah, I think that might be it. We've had a decent
sized webinar anyway, so I think people are probably ready for a
cup of tea by now. But yeah, so thanks for, I mean,
you know, NHSI webinars are always good and the Posit ones
are always good, but I just want to just say on a personal note that that
was very, very, very, very interesting. So Kayleigh
and I have been teamsing in the background
because Kayleigh's saying it's, you know, Kayleigh's not a data
scientist by trade, but she's been saying a lot of it makes sense to her.
So you've really, you know, at the beginning of the webinar, we were
on the very, very basics of package management, real
basic stuff. And then by the end, you were talking about some really
important, like big questions in managing really
important big data science models. So I think that was
I'm going to, I'm not sure if my team are
here or not, but I should be recommending that they all have a watch
back because that was really a good
way of going all the way from just starting out to actually,
you know, some big complicated issues.
So, yes. So thanks very much. That was excellent.
I'm sure everyone in the audience will agree. Yeah.
Also for the support on YouTube, that's really excellent. People can
catch up in their own time. Yeah, absolutely. Let me know when you post it
because I might actually use that link as well. So yeah,
yeah, we'll do. I wish I could say what the next webinar is, but
unfortunately, we don't know because we haven't organized it yet, but there will be another webinar
and I'm sure it'll be marvelous. So please do
come along. Yeah, the YouTube link will be shared
on Slack, on Twitter, Mastodon, all the places we normally share.
And I'll let Ryan at Posit have a link as well.
So do look out for that. And the slides, where will the slides be, right?
I'll send them over to you, Chris, and then you can kind of do
what you want. Yeah. So I don't know what we do with slides,
but if you email nhs.rcommunity at nhs.net,
you can have the slides. There might be a clever way of just reading the slides that I don't know about.
But please, if you do want the slides, just let us know and we'll make sure that you get them.
Sounds good. Great. Well, thanks again.
Thanks for coming, everyone. Thanks, Ryan, for an excellent presentation and we'll see you all next time.
Thanks, everybody. Thanks.